# Project Databases
(copied from https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ayuYQx7DD6dfc2-zzeLat4R8kXZkTp6WlPcD4rcw0YU/edit)

## Normalized Case Databases

This document describes a proposed new core system called "project DB" \- an in-product data silo to be used for reporting, exporting, and flexible in-product data access.  This is to be automatically managed without any project-specific configuration. It is similar to UCR and elasticsearch, and could replace many usages of both.

It consists of autogenerated database tables storing case data (one table per case type) along with standardized tables for users, groups, and locations.

**Author:** Ethan Soergel  
**Division:** USH  
**Status:** Unprioritized \- this is a broad-strokes idea that might help future goals, but we do not yet have plans to draft a more detailed spec or to implement.  If this sounds like something you or your division would find useful, please let us know in the “responses” section at the bottom.

## Problem Statement

A huge limitation of CommCare’s structure as a generic platform is that case data is non-relational and only metadata is schema’d.

#### Schema

Cases contain metadata and project-specific properties, but only the former can be queried properly.  We don’t encode any assumptions about what properties are or may be present for any given case, nor what the data types of those properties might be.  This means that the primary database (`CommCareCase` in PostgreSQL) cannot be queried by anything to do with case properties.

The case search index in elasticsearch partially addresses these limitations through two mechanisms.  First, it stores properties in an [entity-attribute-value model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity–attribute–value_model), allowing us to filter by case property, though it’s convoluted (instead of “`cases where dob > 2023-01-01`”, it’s “`cases containing a property where key = dob and value>2023-01-01`”).  Secondly, we attempt to index the stored values as [five possible datatypes](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/blob/705f47f07051a4ae89f924f80e768e939e1e762e/corehq/apps/es/mappings/case_search_mapping.py#L33-L60), though at present this is under-utilized in the product.

#### Relational Data

Case relationships (parent/child host/extension) are core to the design of most projects.  Applications are built around these relationships.  However, we don’t store case data in a way that it can be queried across indices.  This means to do queries across relationships (a `JOIN` operation in SQL), we must resort to multiple queries that are limited by the inefficiency of the approach.

To do a query like “get all child cases where their parent case matches X criteria”, we first perform a query to get *all* matching possible parent cases, extracting their IDs, then do a second query to get all child cases where the parent ID is in the list from the first query.  This means that any filtering applied to the child case doesn’t limit the number of parent cases involved, and that that full set of parent case IDs must be included in the second query.  This causes infrastructure failures above a certain limit (our current threshold is 500k parent cases), and is a bizarrely inefficient way of querying.

#### Example Queries

* Find all patient cases with a dob \< 2005-08-02 where their household case has\_bednets \= yes  
  * When evaluating this query, we don’t know that `dob` is a date.  It (along with every other property), is stored in ES as a date, number, string, exact string, phonetic string, and possibly lat/long, if coercible to such.  In case search, we currently guess how to do this query based on the operator (\<) and value (2005-08-02).  We could in theory cross reference the data dictionary for this, or the case search config for the project or require some explicit indication in how the query is specified.  
  * Assuming that most household cases in the project will have `has_bednets = yes`, that is potentially a very large number of matching parent cases.  On large projects, this aspect of the query is liable to cause performance issues and possibly fail.  
* Find clients whose dob is 2022-10-08 and whose name is Charlie or who have a child alias case named Charlie  
  * Even if there is a case whose dob and name are both an exact match, we still have to get the full set of alias cases, since that information is necessary for performing the client case query.  
* Find all infant cases with high\_risk \= yes and the most recent imci\_visit case by date of more than 3 months ago  
  * Though we only need to consider the most recent imci\_visit case for each infant case, we don’t have access to that relationship directly, so we’d have to get a list of all imci\_visit cases updated in the last 3 months in the first query, and for the second, exclude infant cases with a child cases in that set of recent imci\_visit IDs.

## Proposed Solution \- First-class case data tables

Each project gets a table in postgres for each of their case types, with case relationships represented as foreign key relationships between them.  I think of this as a replacement for UCR and for the case search index in elasticsearch.  Some highlights of the approach:

* No user-facing configuration whatsoever  
* No rebuilding datasources  
* Write-time costs are low (no related-doc lookups)  
* Data is normalized, so information from related models doesn’t go stale

We introduce Schema models paralleling those in the data dictionary (or we just use those models themselves), which describe the current state of the tables.  Each case property is stored in its “raw” form as a string, and those that have other datatypes are stored in a second column, where they are cast to that type.  As case properties are added or modified, we amend this schema and generate a database migration to apply the changes.  This will be append-only, with all project-specific columns nullable (logical, since we don’t have “required” case properties), meaning all migrations should be trivial and full rebuilds are not needed.  We could also build a data migration tool if we need to recast existing data as a different type, which should be doable in pure SQL.

The table would be populated just like UCR and ES are today \- via pillows, though we may explore synchronous updates for projects that are highly sensitive to latency, like USH’s.

## Possible Feature Integrations

Having straightforward SQL tables of project data opens a lot of doors.  I’ve written some specific ideas I have below, but there are many other possibilities.  In particular, I’d be interested to explore what we can do with off-the-shelf tooling, as presumably there’s a lot that’s built around exploring SQL tables, like plug-n-play reporting or API libraries.

Worth noting is that as we already have UCR tables, some of these features may be able to be developed independently of the normalized case databases feature, reconciling the two at a later date.  However, being able to reference the DD as a schema for the database and for relationships between tables really opens up the possibilities.

### Case Search

Main doc [\[CEP\] UCR-backed Case Search](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19IGh7xV0f4pmn_krs-FQ4ie9pyOJuDrNQ_eu9WgwSfM/edit)  
We could provide an alternate (and eventual replacement?) back-end for case search that assembles SQL queries against the project’s case database rather than elasticsearch queries against the case search index.  This would allow for efficient relational querying and a number of functionalities not currently possible.

While the core of this would certainly be a case search query language syntax, there are techniques and libraries to allow users to safely write SQL queries without risk of escaping a predetermined sandbox.  This needs more research, but I’m fairly confident that we could allow app builders to write at least portions of queries directly in SQL without risk of improper data access.

### Case Exports

Even without normalized case databases, the case exports UI should be switched to use the data dictionary as described in [Data Dictionary Case Exports](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rpCFUXOAJAFBCmh8GMfivShOHfKjskdWPdE2ZPFkqP0/edit#).  With that system, you could easily make a denormalized export, pulling in properties from related cases via the project’s normalized case database.

Another tack I’d like to see is pre-configured standard exports.  That is, rather than presenting user with a complex interface where they configure an export, we start them off with one “standard” export per case type.  This would be based on the properties configured in the data dictionary, and could even include datatype information when exported to excel.  This could be implemented without normalized case databases, but if we had those already, it would be very straightforward to just dump the whole table as-is rather than fetching from elasticsearch and transforming on demand.

Further, with this data in SQL, we could make it available as a SQL data dump for projects which prefer to ingest the data that way.

### Reporting

##### UCR

Given normalized data tables, report builder could be reimagined.  At present, configuring report builder results in a data source config and a report config, so each report gets its own datasource.  Instead, report builder could operate only on report configs, and have access to the datasources for each case type in the project.  This is similar to how ICDS reports were managed.  The upside of that is that we can do much more powerful filtering and aggregation.  Plus we’d have the benefits of normalized data under the hood, like less duplication of data, and reliable updates (currently, related case lookups aren’t refreshed until the main row is).

##### CLE

The CLE could also be switched to use these case databases, operating in the same way as case search.

### Integrations

This also makes sense as a backend for the case API, data forwarding, and especially the generic versions of each of those.  This would enable complex filtering, and in the generic APIs, enriching data sets far more performantly than is currently possible with the related doc approach.

### Data-First App Development

This fits well into what I’ve been thinking of as an explicit, data-first approach to case management.  That wouldn’t be based on these tables exactly, but conceptually it’s highly aligned.

* Current state (app-first): You build an app.  Whatever properties you happen to save to the case (across any number of forms, case imports, others) define an implicit schema of what your case data looks like  
* Future(?) state: You start off by defining what you want to track, then build from there.  Want your app to track patients?  Define what a patient is.  We’ll then autogenerate “new patient” and “edit patient” forms in your app, plus a patient table for use in data access on the back end.

The autogenerate forms thing warrants its own proposal doc, but I’ll summarize here to give a sense of the “data-first” idea.  At present, you go in to app manager, click Add \> Case List, and you get a dropdown asking you to select a case type for the module (I didn’t know about this new feature actually, and was going to propose it).  Imagine then if that were integrated with the data dictionary, so you could preview the case type there in the pop-up, and maybe even make edits.  Then when you click “create”, instead of blank registration and followup forms, you get forms that are pre-populated with one question per case type, with case management already configured.

# Responses

Did you read over this proposal?  What are your thoughts?  Any concerns or open questions?  Other areas such a back-end might be useful?

---

# Old:

# ~~Proposed Solution \#1 \- UCR~~

**~~Update 2025-05-08~~**~~: I actually don’t think UCR brings a lot to the table here, and if we plan to move away from it, we should consider Proposal \#2 below, first-class case data tables.~~

~~This proposal is for the creation of a set of UCR tables per project, one per case type.  This would form the back-end for a number of applications, described in the next section.  The idea for this grew out of [recent data dictionary work](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uDmtxwz6qXZgrpISseDNX0nFACRzSttrOvmJ8UxBaow/edit).~~

~~The data dictionary is (or at least should be) the source of truth for a project’s case structure.  It stores the list of case types, all of the properties for each case type, and the data types of those properties.  It will [hopefully soon](https://dimagi-dev.atlassian.net/browse/USH-1993) also store definitions of case relationships.  Using this information, it should be reasonably straightforward to build a feature which can generate a series of UCR datasource configurations, one per case type.~~

~~This approach would result in a set of [normalized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_normalization) tables that are specific to the project’s data models, with appropriate data types and foreign key references between them.  For example, you might have an `infant` table with `dob` as a date column and a myriad more easily queryable columns storing case properties, plus a foreign key reference to a `mother` table, and an `imci_visit` table which references it.  We already have a `AggregateTableDefinition` abstraction to operate on multiple joined tables.~~

### ~~Limitations~~

~~This proposal takes very flexible data with few constraints and attempts to store it in a highly-constrained manner.  There will likely be many places where our expectations are not met.  For instance, say you declare `dob` to be a date property \- there are currently no guarantees that the values saved to that property are actually valid dates; it is trivial to violate that expectation.  Similarly, case indices have very few guarantees \- you could easily create `infant` cases where the `parent` case is sometimes `mother` and sometimes `household`.  This cannot be entirely avoided, but the issue can be mitigated somewhat by nudging app developers to use the proper question types and such through further integration of the data dictionary into app manager workflows.~~

~~UCR already deals with this issue of non homogeneous data \- we’d essentially have to accept that sometimes data won’t appear or operate as the user expects because it doesn’t fit with expectations.~~

# ~~Similarly, we’d have to figure out a reasonable method of propagating data dictionary changes to the UCR tables.  At present, I believe we rebuild the UCR entirely whenever anything changes, which is a reasonable first step, though we’d probably want a better long term option.  It may be sufficient to treat changes to tables as add-only \- new columns are null for existing data, and old columns aren’t deleted, just removed from view.~~
